---
layout: post
title: "I’m Not so Smart After All, or Maybe I’m Suffering From Imposter Syndrome"
description: ""
category: ""
tags: []
---
Next week I will be presenting at the Boston Ruby Group on imposter syndrome.
I’m looking forward to doing this talk because I think it is such a great topic
that many are not aware of, but I think a lot of smart people suffer from. I
was surprised by the number of colleagues at the office who were not familiar
with the term until looking it up online after hearing the topic of my talk.

Wikipedia defines imposter syndrome as follows,

The **impostor syndrome**, sometimes called **impostor phenomenon** or **fraud
syndrome**, is a psychological phenomenon in which people are unable to
[internalize](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internalize) their accomplishments.
Despite external evidence of their competence, those with the syndrome remain
convinced that they are frauds and do not deserve the success they have
achieved. Proof of success is dismissed as luck, timing, or as a result of
deceiving others into thinking they are more
[intelligent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligent) and competent than they
believe themselves to be.

As with all things, there are different degrees of impact in how people are
effected. I believe this is very common in the software industry and even more
commonly felt by conference presenters and book writers in the software
industry, but also somewhat impacts the sharing of code for open source
projects.

Those three examples all share the same underlying issue, the presenter,
author, or developer writing code feel knowledgable in the topic area, but at
the same time feel that the community they are presenting to either already
knows more on the topic or will actually think the presenter, author, or
developer is a fraud because they do not have good command of the topic shared.

[Ben Orenstein](https://twitter.com/r00k) and [Jon
Larkowski](https://twitter.com/l4rk) covered this topic quickly on a
[thoughtbot podcast](http://podcasts.thoughtbot.com/giantrobots/48), around the
22:40 mark.  A quick summary is that this problem is more common in the
programming community because we are a group evaluated on the merit of our
intelligence. Ben refers to a conversation with [Katrina
Owen](https://twitter.com/kytrinyx) having imposter syndrome with a peep cast
she had worked on. The same women who presented [one of the more well known
talks on refactoring](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J4dlF0kcThQ), feels
inferior relative to the community she is providing knowledge material to.

Another great podcast to listen to for some more background is the [Ruby Rogues
107
Podcast](http://rubyrogues.com/107-rr-impostor-syndrome-with-tim-chevalier/)
with [Tim Chevalier]([http://tim.dreamwidth.org/1779204.html). Katrina Owen is
a rogue and stated the following during that podcast,

*I think one of the really scary things about Impostor Syndrome is it feels so
real. I feel, when I’m feeling it very strongly, it’s my reality. My reality is
that I don’t belong there and at any moment, my whole life can come crashing
down because if people discover that I don’t belong there. And there’s no help
in people saying, “Well, you’re a good programmer. You’re smart,” or “You’re
doing fine,” or “You’re delivering plenty of value.” It’s like, “Ugh, well no.
I’m not. But you just don’t see it yet.”*

Those that suffer from imposter syndrome are afraid to present, afraid to
write, afraid to share code and more.  {% include JB/setup %}
